
========================================================================
A 26-A 26-Year-Old Pregnant Woman with Ventricular Tachycardia and Shock
========================================================================

This case report was published as
`Scott NS et al. (2021) N Engl J Med. 2021 Jan 21;384(3):272-282 <https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33471980/>`_.

Here are the relevant excerpts from the initial presentation


.. note::

   A 26-year-old pregnant woman was transferred to this hospital for  evaluation and treatment of
   **cardiogenic shock** after a **cardiac arrest** resulting from  **ventricular tachycardia**.
   The patient had had two previous uncomplicated pregnancies and was currently  pregnant at 32 weeks
   of gestation with monochorionic, diamniotic twins. Her pregnancy had been monitored for
   **polyhydramnios** by her obstetrician with the use of  serial fetal ultrasonography. Three weeks before
   presentation to this hospital, one of the patient’s preschoolage children had an ear infection and
   the other had a sore throat. The patient had  **erythema in the eyes with greenish drainage**, for which
   topical erythromycin and  sulfacetamide were prescribed. One week later, a **nonproductive cough** complicated
   by a **sore throat** and **ear pain** developed. The patient also noted new **edema in her legs** that
   was not associated with pain, redness, or warmth. However, during the  subsequent week, **progressive pain in her right leg**
   occurred, which prompted her  to seek care at an emergency department of another hospital. On examination,
   the temperature was 37.0°C, the pulse 113 beats per minute,  and the blood pressure 90/50 mm Hg.
   **Pitting edema** of the legs was noted, with **no  associated erythema, warmth, or tenderness on palpation of the calves.**
   Ultrasonography of the right leg reportedly showed **no evidence of deep-vein thrombosis**, and  **a rapid test for
   streptococcal antigen was negative**. While the patient was in the  emergency department,
   painful uterine contractions with back discomfort developed; the cervix was 2 cm dilated. She was admitted to
   the labor and delivery unit  for management of **preterm labor**. Intramuscular betamethasone and magnesium  sulfate were
   administered for maturation of the fetal lungs and tocolysis, respectively. Continuous intravenous infusion of
   lactated Ringer’s solution was initiated.  Subcutaneous heparin was not administered, because delivery was thought
   to be  imminent. After 24 hours of magnesium sulfate therapy, the uterine contractions remained unchanged, and no
   further cervical  dilatation was noted. Because of concern about  preterm labor, she remained hospitalized,
   with  continuous monitoring of the fetal heart rate. Five days after admission to the labor and  delivery unit,
   the patient had **tenderness in the  left leg**, and the **edema in both legs** had worsened. She also had episodes
   of **severe coughing**  but reported **no chest pain** or **shortness of breath**.
   On examination, the temperature was 36.9°C,  the pulse 110 beats per minute, the blood pressure 96/51 mm Hg,
   and the oxygen saturation  98% while the patient was breathing ambient  air. Auscultation of the lungs revealed
   **expiratory  wheezes**. Laboratory test results are shown in  Table 1. Doppler ultrasound examination of the  legs
   revealed an **occlusive thrombus in the left  peroneal vein**. The hematology service was consulted, and an intravenous
   heparin infusion was  initiated. Intravenous furosemide and oral azithromycin and guaifenesin were also administered.
   The next morning, after the patient had eaten  breakfast, she had sudden **severe, “crushing” chest  pain** and became
   **unresponsive** and **pulseless**.  Telemetry revealed
   **monomorphic ventricular tachycardia** at a rate of 178 beats per minute,  with a **right bundle-branch block** pattern
   with a  superior axis. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was  initiated, and after the administration of
   epinephrine and cardioversion, the return of spontaneous  circulation was achieved within 4 minutes.
   Intravenous infusions of norepinephrine, vasopressin,  dopamine, propofol, and fentanyl were administered.
   The trachea was intubated, and ventilatory  support was initiated. An emergency cesarean  section was
   performed, and two healthy male infants were delivered, with an estimated intraoperative blood loss of 1600 ml.
   Laboratory test results are shown in Table 1.


Relevant clinical features are highlighted in the above text. Extraction of features produced this prompt.


.. code-block:: shell
   :linenos:

    A 26-year old female presented with the following signs and symptoms:
    Pedal edema
    Right bundle branch block
    Wheezing
    Ear pain
    Cardiac arrest
    Cardiogenic shock
    Polyhydramnios
    Nonproductive cough
    Pharyngalgia
    Monomorphic ventricular tachycardia

    The following signs and symptoms were excluded:
    Dyspnea
    Deep venous thrombosis


We additionally tested this prompt, which was manually created


.. code-block:: shell
   :linenos:

    A 26-year old female presented with cardiogenic shock** after a cardiac arrest resulting from  ventricular tachycardia.
    Three weeks before presentation to this hospital, the patient had the following symptoms:
        erythema in the eyes with greenish drainage.
    One week later, the patient had the following symptoms:
        nonproductive cough
        sore throat
        ear pain
        edema in her legs
    during the  subsequent week, the patient had the following symptoms:
        progressive pain in her right leg
        tachycardia
        Pitting edema
    The following signs and symptoms were excluded:
        Fever
        Hypertension
        erythema, warmth, or tenderness on palpation of the calves.
        deep-vein thrombosis
        a rapid test for streptococcal antigen was negative
   While the patient was in the  emergency department, the patient had the following symptoms:
        painful uterine contractions
        back discomfort
        preterm labor
        tenderness in the  left leg
        edema in both legs
        severe coughing
        expiratory  wheezes.
        occlusive thrombus in the left  peroneal vein. T
        severe, “crushing” chest  pain
        unresponsive
        pulseless
        monomorphic ventricular tachycardia
        right bundle-branch block


The responses of GPT-4 were

1. Original text


.. code-block:: shell
   :linenos:

    Based on the provided case details, here are my responses:

        Most likely diagnosis/diagnoses:

    a. Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) with catastrophic antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (CAPS) and pulmonary embolism.
    b. Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) with coronary artery thrombosis.

        Robust differential diagnosis:

    a. Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) with catastrophic antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (CAPS) and pulmonary embolism.
    b. Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) with coronary artery thrombosis.
    c. Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) without ST-segment elevation.
    d. Dissecting aortic aneurysm.
    e. Myocarditis.
    f. Viral pneumonia.
    g. Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
    h. Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP).
    i. Sepsis.
    j. Pulmonary hypertension.
    k. Aortic dissection.
    l. Ventricular arrhythmias (e.g., ventricular fibrillation).
    m. Stress-induced cardiomyopathy (Takotsubo syndrome).
    n. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
    o. Peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM).



2. text-mined prompt

.. code-block:: shell
   :linenos:

   Thank you for providing the case information, and I understand the rules of the clinicopathological case conference. Based on the given signs and symptoms, here are my responses:

    Most likely diagnosis/diagnoses: Peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM)

    Robust differential diagnosis:
    a. Peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM)
    b. Viral myocarditis
    c. Ischemic heart disease (e.g., acute myocardial infarction)
    d. Dilated cardiomyopathy
    e. Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
    f. Restrictive cardiomyopathy
    g. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
    h. Pulmonary embolism
    i. Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
    j. Aortic dissection
    k. Myocardial infarction with nonobstructive coronary arteries (MINOCA)
    l. Acute pericarditis
    m. Pulmonary hypertension
    n. Mitral valve prolapse with regurgitation
    o. Hypertensive heart disease

    Please note that the differential diagnosis is listed in descending order of probability, with the most likely diagnosis at the top and less likely ones towards the bottom.
    Are there any specific tests being ordered for this case?

3. Manual feature-based prompt

.. code-block:: shell
   :linenos:

    Thank you for providing the additional information. Based on the updated case details, here are my responses:

    Most likely diagnosis/diagnoses: Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) with catastrophic antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (CAPS)

    Robust differential diagnosis:
    a. Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) with catastrophic antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (CAPS)
    b. Acute myocardial infarction (AMI)
    c. Acute pulmonary embolism
    d. Acute coronary syndrome (ACS)
    e. Myocarditis
    f. Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
    g. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
    h. Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP)
    i. Sepsis
    j. Pulmonary hypertension
    k. Aortic dissection
    l. Viral pneumonia
    m. Acute pericarditis
    n. Pulmonary edema
    o. Ventricular arrhythmias (e.g., ventricular fibrillation)

    Please note that the differential diagnosis is listed in descending order of probability, with the most likely diagnosis at the top and less likely ones towards the bottom.
    Are there any specific tests being ordered for this case?


Evaluation
^^^^^^^^^^

The actual diagnosis for the case was `Pregnancy-associated myocardial infarction, probably due to spontaneous coronary-artery
dissection.`

None of the prompts led GPT to return the correct result. Peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM) is a cardiovascular condition
related to pregancy but not myocardial infarction and was ranked in the narrative and the text-mined prompts.
Acute myocardial infarction (no mention of pregnancy) was placed at rank b in the
 manual feature based query.